## Working directory

The master directory for this year is the "2021". So clone the entire git repo and move into the correct folder. If you don't want other stuff on your computer you should locally remove anything else beside the working dir.

```
git clone https://github.com/for-giobbe/phy
cd ./2021
```

All code of the markdown files should be lunched in the master directory, otherwise change the paths where necessary.
Extract all necessary files:


```
gunzip Data/Proteoms/*
tar -C Analyses/  -zxvf Analyses/Orthofinder_Results_Mar30.tar.gz
```

## Dataset

In these lessons we are going to use the proteoms from 7 Mollusk species taken from public database plus one Anellidae as outgroup:

  * *Biomphalaria glabrata* (Gasteropoda)
  * *Acanthopleura granulata* (Poliplacophora)
  * *Crassostrea virginica* (Bivalvia)
  * *Lotita gigantea* (Gasteropoda)
  * *Octopus bimaculoides* (Cephalopoda)
  * *Sinivicula constricta* (Bivalvia)
  * *Pinctada fucata* (Bivalvia)
  * *Helobdella robusta* (Anellidae)

Let's have a look at the first ten headers of one of the proteoms (all are stored in the ```Data/Proteoms``` folder):

```
grep ">" Data/Proteoms/B_glabrata_2.pep | head -n 10
>B_glabrata|XP_013069100.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013079153.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013070418.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013085147.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013079423.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013064541.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013084231.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013088149.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013061816.1
>B_glabrata|XP_013081362.1
```

As you can see the headers have been simplified compared to the NCBI default. Indeed, some programs we are going to use write many files (maybe too many), so it is a good practice to try to reduce their weight. Furthermore, this also makes much easier to immediatly understand the species from which the sequences come from. However, it is mandatory to leave a unique reference to the original proteome in order to be able to trace back quickly the full original header if necessary.

An important note: During these lessons we will probably work only with **protein sequences** (depending on time). Our species are quite distant related (see [here](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-56728-w) for a recent phylogenomic and divergence time estimation) so protein can give enough phylogentic informations avoiding substial substitution saturation phenomena(be aware of this corollary). However, if we are dealing with species more closely related, we would prefered nucleotide sequences which convey more information (due to the genetic code degeneracy) 
