# Building a Tree in a ML Framework

<br/>

## intro:

Maximum likelihood is a general statistical method for estimating parameters of a probability model: for example a normal distribution can be described by two parameters: the mean and variance. Instead, in molecular phylogenetics there are a wide plethora of parameters, which include:

* rates of transitions / trasversions / ... between bases
* base composition
* descriptors of rate heterogeneity across sites
* branchlengths
* the tree itself!

The likelihood is defined as a quantity proportional to the probability of observing the data given the model: 
```
P(D|M)
```
If we have a model, we can calculate the probability the observations would have actually been observed as a function of the model. We then examine this likelihood function to see where it is at its greatest, and the value of the parameter of interests at that point is the maximum likelihood estimate of the parameter (_e.g._ the tree and branch lengths).

In this lesson we are going to compute a phylogenetic tree in a ML framework and explore a bit the relative support metrics, which can inform us of the confidence relative to a split.

---

<br/>
<br/>

## inferring gene trees - unpartitioned analyses:


During last lesson we found the best-fit model of evolution without doing tree reconstruction, but we can perform both the search for the best-fit model and the phylogenetic inference by just using the ```-m MFP``` flag. After ModelFinder, IQ-TREE will immediately start the tree reconstruction under the best-fit partition model. 

A good practice in phylogenetic inference is to build up single gene trees, in this way you can get usefull informations about your markers (are all gene trees telling you the same story? Which are the more informative markers? Are present markers with a different evolutionary history compared to others? Which markers sows more concordance with bibliography knowledge?). If we have a lot of markers, as in our case, we can quickly build uop gene trees in two different ways:

 * **1:** Cycle a model selection followed by tree reconstruction inside our alignment folder.
 * **2:** Using ```-S``` flag followed by the name of the directory were are stored alignments.

Let's use the latest one:

```
mkdir Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees
iqtree -S Analyses/1-to-1_Alignments/gblock/ --prefix Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci
```
IQ-TREE automatically detects that ALN_DIR is a directory and will load all alignments within the directory. The ```-S``` takes the same argument as -s except that it performs model selection and tree inference separately for each  partition or alignment. The output files are:

Here are the outputs:

* ```.best_scheme.nex``` best fit partitioning scheme (in our case is just one partition for gene).
* ```.best_model.nex``` best-fit evolutionary model for each partition. 
* ```.iqtree``` is the analysis report.
* ```.model.gz``` is the complete evolutionary model.
* ```.treefile``` is the set Maximum Likelihood gene trees.
* ```.log``` is the screen log.
* ```.ckp.gz``` is just a checkpoint file. 

If we followed the for loop way, we will have one of this output files for each gene tree, thus filling our working directory with tones of files.

Let's take a deeper look at the log file, the IQ-TREE report, and the .parstree file:

```
less -S Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.log
less -S Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.iqtree
cat Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.parstree
```

>Remember that most phylogenetic programs produce unrooted trees, as they are not aware about any biological background. We can root them using our *a priori* biological knowledge or use approches as the mid point rooting.

From the ```.treefile``` we can easly extract single gene trees if we want to manually look at them (**NB:** trees are in the same order as input data, unfortunately they are not annotated). However, if we have a lot of loci, is better to first find an automatic way able to easly highlights and summarize differences between a set of trees. For this purpose, IQ-TREE implements the Robinson-Foulds distances calculation, a metric able to compare topologies between **binary** but **unrooted** trees (see [here](https://www.cs.hmc.edu/~hadas/mitcompbio/treedistance.html) for an in-depth explanation on computational methods). In brief it measures the symmetric difference between two trees by adding the number of splits (*i.e* edges) that are present in tree A (but not tree B) to the number of splits present in tree B (but not tree A).

We can calculate this metric just typing:

```
iqtree -rf_all Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.treefile
```

Let's have a look at the results:

```
head Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.treefile.rfdist 
49 49
Tree0       0 10 6 8 10 10 10 8 10 8 8 8 10 10 8 10 10 10 8 10 8 10 10 8 10 10 10 8 4 8 8 10 8 8 10 10 8 10 8 8 10 8 10 8 10 10 8 8 8
Tree1       10 0 10 8 6 8 8 8 8 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 6 8 8 8 6 6 10 8 8 8 10 6 6 4 8 8 8 8 6 8 6 8 8 10 8 8 10 6 8 8 8
Tree2       6 10 0 8 10 8 10 8 8 8 6 8 10 10 8 10 10 10 8 8 8 8 10 10 10 8 8 6 8 8 8 10 8 8 8 8 8 10 8 10 8 6 10 8 8 10 8 6 8
Tree3       8 8 8 0 8 8 8 6 8 6 6 6 6 8 4 6 6 8 6 8 8 8 6 8 8 8 8 6 8 6 6 8 6 6 8 8 6 6 6 8 8 8 10 6 10 6 6 4 6
Tree4       10 6 10 8 0 8 4 6 8 6 8 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 4 8 8 8 6 8 10 8 8 6 10 4 4 6 8 8 8 6 6 6 6 8 8 10 4 6 10 6 6 8 6
Tree5       10 8 8 8 8 0 8 6 2 8 6 8 8 8 8 6 8 8 8 8 8 6 6 8 10 8 8 6 10 6 6 8 4 4 8 8 6 8 6 8 8 10 10 6 8 6 6 8 6
Tree6       10 8 10 8 4 8 0 4 8 8 8 4 8 8 6 8 8 8 6 8 10 8 8 8 10 8 8 6 10 6 6 8 8 6 8 4 8 6 8 8 8 10 8 4 10 8 4 8 4
Tree7       8 8 8 6 6 6 4 0 6 6 4 2 8 8 4 8 8 8 4 8 6 6 6 8 10 8 8 2 8 2 2 8 4 2 8 6 4 8 4 8 8 8 8 0 8 6 0 6 0
Tree8       10 8 8 8 8 2 8 6 0 8 6 8 8 8 8 6 6 8 8 8 8 6 6 8 10 8 8 6 10 6 6 8 6 6 8 8 6 8 6 8 8 10 10 6 8 6 6 8 6
```

As we can see RF distances give us integer numbers as results. This can be easly interpreted if we want to compare distancess between each pair (for example to find more similar and dissimilar gene trees). But what if we want an "absolute" value able to describe the amount of difference between two trees? In this case we should use this equation:

   *y=RF/(2x(n-3))*
   
Where:

 * *n*=number of taxa (leaves)
 * *y*=fraction of differing edges

In our case our trees have 5 internal branches (calculated as *n-3*) so RF distances of 10 means that two trees are **completly different** (*i.e* they don't share any branch)

These results highlight a complex evoultionary history even of 1-to-1 orthologs (that remember "should" evolve as the species tree, so all equally). So probably, a coalescent method won't work well to infer the correct specie tree (but better always to test these assumptions). However, it is possible that with a supermatrix approach we can still get good results.

We can carry out the phylogenetic inference on our concatenation just by specifying the our precomputed partition file (the one obtained with ```-spp``` option since it gave better results)

```
iqtree -s Analyses/IQ-TREE/My_Concat.fa -spp Analyses/IQ-TREE/spp_MergedPartitions.best_scheme.nex -bb 1000 --prefix Analyses/IQ-TREE/specie.tree
```

where with the option ```-bb 1000``` we are specifing the number of parametric bootstrap replicates ( actually a slightly different version, called **UFB2** - **Ultra FastBootstrap 2** - described in [Hoang et al., 2018](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/35/2/518/4565479))

The outputs generated will be the same as the ones produced by the unpartitioned analysis. 
Among the large number of parameters which can affect the tree search process in IQ-TREE, IMHO some of the more decisive are:

Bootstrap options:

 * ```-bnni``` = further optimitation of each bootstrap tree using a hill-climbing nearest neighbor interchange (NNI) search, based directly on the corresponding bootstrap alignment. Usefull to reduce the risk of overestimating branch supports with UFBoot due to severe model violations. 
 * ```-nm``` = Specify the maximum number of iterations to stop (*DEFAULT* 1000). If after 1000 iterations bootstrap values still not convergence, it will give up (usually it is increased).

Tree search options:

 * ```-nstop``` = specify number of unsuccesfull iterations to stop (DEFAULT 100). If after 100 iterations it is not finding a new best tree, it will give up (usually increased).
 * ```-pers``` = specify perturbation strength (between 0 and 1) for randomized NNI, default is 0.5.

Moreover, is a good practice to run at least 10 IQ-TREE runs and chose the one with the bes logL values. It can be found in the ```.iqtree``` file. In this way you can be a little bit more sure that your tree is not stucked in a local optima.

Now let's open the tree (it should be called specie.tree.treefile) and compare it to:

  * The one obtained directly with Orthofinder.
  * The phylogenomic from [Kocot et al., 2020](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-56728-w).
  * 

Finally, there are several metrics of support in phylogenetics which can provide different perspective on the confidence of a clade/bipartition. Moreover they can sometimes be informative of biological processes (such as fast evolutionary radiations, genes with interesting evolutionary history)! Aside the traditional ones (as bootstrap and jacknife, here not discussed) some new ones get proposed and/or implemented from time to time. For example IQ-TREE implements at least three other types of nodal support metrics:

  * **1. SH-like approximate likelihood ratio test:** a non-parametric approximate likelihood ratio test based on a Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like procedure implemented in IQ-TREE via the flag ```-alrt```.
  * **2. Likelihood mapping analysis:** not covered here but see IQ-TREE manual and [Strimmer and Haeseler, 1997](https://www.pnas.org/content/94/13/6815.long) for original publication.
  * **3. CFs:** ([Minh et al., 2020](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/37/9/2727/5828940)) two measures for quantifying genealogical concordance in phylogenomic datasets: the gene concordance factor (**gCF**) and the site concordance factor (**sCF**). For every branch of a reference tree, gCF is defined as the percentage of “decisive” gene trees containing that branch. sCF is defined as the percentage of decisive alignment sites supporting a branch in the reference tree. sCF is a novel measure that is particularly useful when individual gene alignments are relatively uninformative, such that gene trees are uncertain.

Now let's perform CFs calculation with the following command:

```
mkdir Analyses/IQ-TREE/CFs
iqtree -t Analyses/IQ-TREE/specie.tree.treefile --gcf Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.treefile -p Analyses/1-to-1_Alignments/gblock/ --scf 100 --prefix Analyses/IQ-TREE/CFs/concord
```

and take a look at the resulting nodal support values on figtree (compared them each other and against BS).

If we had time, what could we do to improve our phylogeny? Well, a lot of things can be done.

  * **1.** Increase the taxon sampling.
  * **2.** Increase the sample of loci.
  * **3.** We can use softwares like Phylotreepruner to remove orthologs that does not follow a taxonomic constrain (imposed by strong bibliography knowledge, *e.g* monophyly of Bivalvia).
  * **4.** We can try to change the outgroup (very common).
  * **5.** We can check if there are some compositional biases in our dataset and in case remove them (*e.g.* Aliscore).
  * **6.** If we can confidentialy put some constrains on the tree (or we want just to test these hypotesis) we can build up a partially constrained tree and calculates the partition log-likelihoods on both the constrained and uncostrained trees. In this way we can indentify partitions that support more one topology or the other and take a deeper look at them. Another way to do a similar thing, is to calculate RF distances between each gene tree and the constrained/uncostrained trees.
  * **7.** We can check for saturation (*e.g* identifying faster evolving genes/sites).

...And **A LOT** of other stuff (*e.g* tree topology testing, likelihood mapping, site log-likelihoods ...), almost always inside IQ-TREE (take a look [here](http://www.iqtree.org/doc/Command-Reference)for a complete list of IQ-TREE functions).

However, remember that your results should be always presented, discussed and justified comparing them to bibliography!

>**NB** if you have lost results for this part you can find them [here]().

## The Newick format:

The Newick is by far the most used format to store trees and it substantially is a combinations of parentheses, punctuation, numbers & letters.
The format name is known to have a [quite funny origin](http://newicks.com/). Lets take a look at some possibilities the ```.nwk``` offers:


```
(,,(,));                         	      no nodes are named

(A,B,(C,D));                     	      leaf nodes are named

(A,B,(C,D)E)F;                     	      all nodes are named

(:0.1,:0.2,(:0.3,:0.4):0.5);    	      all but root node have a distance to parent

(:0.1,:0.2,(:0.3,:0.4):0.5):0.0;     	      all have a distance to parent

(A:0.1,B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4):0.5);    	      distances and leaf names (popular)

(A:0.1,B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4)E:0.5)F; 	      distances and all names

((B:0.2,(C:0.3,D:0.4)E:0.5)A:0.1)F; 	      a tree rooted on a leaf node (rare)
```

Such a simple format has several interesting implications. If N = n. species, there are:

* N terminal branches
* 2N-3 total branches
* N-3 internal branches
* N-2 internal nodes

Regarding the number of trees which can possibly describe the relationships between a given number of terminal nodes (_e.g._ species),
I'll just say that is a number which goes up quite quickly. This even more true for trees with a root, as 
for each unrooted there are 2N-3 times as many rooted trees. Here are some numbers: 

| Leaves        | Unrooted trees           | Rooted trees  |
| ------------- |:------------------------:| -------------:|
| 3             | 1                        | 3             |
| 5             | 15                       | 105           |
| 7             | 945                      | 10,395        |
| 9             | 135,135                  | 2,027,025     |
| 10            | 2,027,025                | 34,459,425    |

Last but not least, remember that ```.nwk``` trees are not unique representations, 
and that relationships between terminals can be written in several different ways.

We can visualize ```.nwk``` files either [online](https://itol.embl.de/upload.cgi) or using software as [FigTree](http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).

---

<br/>
<br/>

## further reading: 

Resources on concordance factors: [paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/487801v2) & [tutorial](http://www.robertlanfear.com/blog/files/concordance_factors.html).

[Here](http://www.iqtree.org/doc/iqtree-doc.pdf) you'll find the manual for IQ-TREE, it's quite user-friendly and exhaustive.


